[shopsys] easier elasticsearch extensibility (#1622)
shopsys/shopsys: docs/cookbook/adding-a-new-elasticsearch-index.md

# Adding a New Elasticsearch Index

In this cookbook, we will add a new elasticsearch index for categories, implement basic functions for data export, implement cron module, and support for partial export.

## New elasticsearch mapping

As a first step we need to define [elasticsearch mapping](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/mapping.html) in `src/Resources/definition/category/` for all domains (e.g. for 2 domains with ID 1 and 2: `1.json`, `2.json`).

> 

Reviewer: What do you think about some minimalist configuration like
```
{
    "settings": {
        "index": {
            "number_of_shards": 1,
            "number_of_replicas": 0
        }
    },
    "mappings": {
        "_doc": {
            "properties": {
                "name": {
                    "type": "text"
                },
                "description": {
                    "type": "text"
                },
                "parentId": {
                    "type": "integer"
                },
                "level": {
                    "type": "integer"
                },
                "uuid": {
                    "type": "text"
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

## New CategoryIndex

Create a class `CategoryIndex` in `src/Model/Category/Elasticsearch`. The class must extends class `AbstractIndex`.

```php
declare(strict_types=1);

namespace App\Model\Category\Elasticsearch;

use Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Component\Elasticsearch\AbstractIndex;

class CategoryIndex extends AbstractIndex
{

>     public function getName(): string

Author: sure

    {
        // TODO: Implement getName() method.
    }
    public function getTotalCount(int $domainId): int
    {
        // TODO: Implement getTotalCount() method.
    }
    public function getExportDataForIds(int $domainId, array $restrictToIds): array
    {
        // TODO: Implement getExportDataForIds() method.
    }

    public function getExportDataForBatch(int $domainId,int $lastProcessedId,int $batchSize) : array
    {
        // TODO: Implement getExportDataForBatch() method.
    }
}
```

Register new index into `services.yml`

```yaml
    Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Model\Category\Elasticsearch\CategoryIndex: ~
```

## Create new index into elasticsearch

To create an index into elasticsearch we need to implement `getName()` method in `CategoryIndex`.
The best practice is to define index name into constant due to later usage for obtaining data.

```diff

> +   public const INDEX_NAME = 'category';

Author: The purpose of public constant is to be available when you implement read logic. 
e.g. https://github.com/shopsys/shopsys/blob/e6076b845e80d3ba80b8d6cddff364fa4356a9bb/packages/framework/src/Model/Product/ProductOnCurrentDomainElasticFacade.php#L343

> +   public const INDEX_NAME = 'category';

Reviewer: I see... Maybe making the getName() method static could be a little more straightforward to use.

+
    public function getName(): string
    {
-       // TODO: Implement getName() method.

> +       return static::INDEX_NAME;

Author: IMHO it may be overridden when you need implement export methods by yourself.

    }
```

So far it is the most minimalistic implementation.

> Now we are able to create an index in elasticsearch by running `./phing elasticsearch-index-create -D elasticsearc.index=category`.

Reviewer: In this point, I get the following error:
```
There is no index "category" registered (uncaught exception) at
packages/framework/src/Component/Elasticsearch/Exception/ElasticsearchIndexException.php line 97 
while running console command `shopsys:elasticsearch:indexes-create`
```

and I had to manually tag the service with elasticsearch.index....
```
   App\Model\Category\Elasticsearch\CategoryIndex:
        tags: ['elasticsearch.index']
```

Author: This is weird. Did not help you cleaning cache? I guess it should help - also it might be mentioned here.

Reviewer: Cleaning cache did not help.
I have `CategoryIndex extends AbstractIndex` and in `project-base/config/services.yaml` I registered this class as a service.
When I remove the tag from CategoryIndex from services.yaml, it fails on the error above.

Author: Fixed via https://github.com/shopsys/shopsys/pull/1622/commits/403af0cffe379157eecc3a018b482043eab43c46

Also we can use `./phing elasticsearch-index-recreate` or `./phing elasticsearch-index-delete`.

!!! note
Command `./phing elasticsearch-index-create -D elasticsearc.index=category` will creates elasticsearch index only for out CategoryIndex.
Using `./phing elasticsearch-index-create` (without `-D` flag) it will create elasticsearch indexes for all registered ones in your project (product, category, and so on).

## Export data into elasticsearch

Creating and deleting index is nice but it is not really useful.
As a next step we will implement method `getTotalCount()` and `getExportDataForBatch()` to be able export data.

We can use already existing method in `\Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Model\Category\CategoryRepository::getTranslatedVisibleSubcategoriesByDomain()`.
The method `getTranslatedVisibleSubcategoriesByDomain()` needs as a second argument an instance of `DomainConfig` so we need to inject an instance of `Domain` class along with instance of `CategortRepository` into `CategoryIndex`.  

> ```diff

Author: I have changed it. The original purpose was to be more clear but it is a bit annoying when everything is highlighted by green background.

+       ));
    }
```

and also a `getExportDataForBatch()` with a private converting method `convertToElastic()`

```diff
    public function getExportDataForBatch(int $domainId,int $lastProcessedId,int $batchSize) : array
    {
-       // TODO: Implement getExportDataForBatch() method.
+       $domainConfig = $this->domain->getDomainConfigById($domainId);
+       $categories = $this->categoryRepository->getTranslatedVisibleSubcategoriesByDomain(
+           $this->categoryRepository->getRootCategory(),
+           $domainConfig
+       );
+       $locale = $domainConfig->getLocale();
+       foreach ($categories as $category) {
+           $result[$category->getId()] = $this->convertToElastic($category, $domainId, $locale);
+       }
+       return $result;
    }
+
+   private function convertToElastic(Category $category, int $domainId, string $locale): array
+   {
+       return [
+           'name' => $category->getName($locale),
+           'description' => $category->getDescription($domainId),
+           'parentId' => $category->getParent()->getId(),
+           'level' => $category->getLevel(),
+           'uuid' => $category->getUuid(),
+       ];
+   }
```

!!! note

> The `getExportDataForBatch()` must return serialized array of rows indexed by its ID

Reviewer: admonitions have to be indented

> Now we can export categories data (name, description, parentId, level, and uuid) into elasticsearch index via `./phing elasticsearch-export -D elaticsearch.index=category` (we need to have created index first, see the step above).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can export categories data (name, description, parentId, level, and uuid) into elasticsearch with `./phing elasticsearch-export -D elasticsearch.index=category` (index have to be created first, see the step above).
```

### Exporting via cron

> We may automate the export process via CronModule which is super easy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We may automate the export process thanks to the `CronModule` which is super easy.
```

> All we need to achieve this goal is to create a new class `CategoryExportCronModule` which extends `AbstractExportCronModule`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All we need to do to achieve this goal is to create a new class `CategoryExportCronModule` which extends `AbstractExportCronModule`.
```

> All we need to achieve this goal is to create a new class `CategoryExportCronModule` which extends `AbstractExportCronModule`.

Reviewer: it would be nice to say the best place where to create the new `CategoryExportCronModule` (it's later guessable from namespace, but at first it made me thinking)

> The most important task here is to override parent constructor with changing a type hint of the first argument to our created index (`CategoryIndex`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most important task here is to override parent constructor and change the type-hint of the first argument to our created index (`CategoryIndex`).
```

```php
declare(strict_types=1);

namespace App\Model\Category\Elasticsearch;

use Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Component\Domain\Domain;
use Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Component\Elasticsearch\AbstractExportCronModule;
use Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Component\Elasticsearch\IndexDefinitionLoader;
use Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Component\Elasticsearch\IndexFacade;

class CategoryExportCronModule extends AbstractExportCronModule
{
    /**
     * @param \App\Model\Category\Elasticsearch\CategoryIndex $index
     * @param \Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Component\Elasticsearch\IndexFacade $indexFacade
     * @param \Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Component\Elasticsearch\IndexDefinitionLoader $indexDefinitionLoader
     * @param \Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Component\Domain\Domain $domain
     */
    public function __construct(
        CategoryIndex $index,
        IndexFacade $indexFacade,
        IndexDefinitionLoader $indexDefinitionLoader,
        Domain $domain
    ) {
        parent::__construct($index, $indexFacade, $indexDefinitionLoader, $domain);
    }
}
```

Now if we have [crons](../introduction/cron.md) properly configured the new cron will be started automatically with others.

> Or you may want to [configure](../cookbook/working-with-multiple-cron-instances.md) this cron module with different timing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or you may want to [configure](../cookbook/working-with-multiple-cron-instances.md) this cron module with different timing.
```

### Implement partial update

Sometimes we want to export data immediately after the original data are changed (hiding category, rename, ...).
For this purpose we need to implement `CategoryIndex::getExportDataForIds()`, scheduler for queuing, and [subscriber](https://symfony.com/doc/current/event_dispatcher.html#creating-an-event-subscriber) for processing queue.

Anywhere you want to add row to immediate export you may call `CategoryExportScheduler::scheduleRowIdForImmediateExport()` for adding a row into the queue.

#### Scheduler

> Scheduler is used as a queue of IDs which we want to export. When we make any changes we may add an affected category ID into this queue and Subscriber will pick it up after request is done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scheduler is used as a queue of IDs we want to export. When we make any changes we may add an affected category ID into this queue and subscriber will pick it up after request is done.
```

Create class `CategoryExportScheduler` which extends `AbstractExportScheduler`. We do not need to override nor implement any method.

```php
declare(strict_types=1);

namespace App\Model\Category\Elasticsearch;

use Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Component\Elasticsearch\AbstractExportScheduler;

class CategoryExportScheduler extends AbstractExportScheduler
{
}
```

#### Subscriber

Create class `CategoryExportSubscriber` which extends `AbstractExportSubsriber`.

> Override its `__construct()`, and `getSubscribedEvents()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Override its `__construct()` and `getSubscribedEvents()` methods.
```

Author: What about an Oxfords comma? 😄

Reviewer: I'm glad you're thinking about it 👍 
But Oxford comma takes place in a list of three or more items https://www.lexico.com/definition/oxford_comma

Here is important to override constructors arguments type hint.
Instead of abstract classes from `\Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Component\Elasticsearch` you need to replace it with our new implementation (`CategoryExportScheduler`, `CategoryIndex`).

> Implementation of `getSubscribedEvents()` is desired to use `exportScheduledRows()` from abstract class but also we can implement in by ourselves.

Reviewer: The method  `getSubscribedEvents()` is abstract in the parent class. So it has to be implemented

     * @param \Doctrine\ORM\EntityManagerInterface $entityManager
     * @param \Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Component\Elasticsearch\IndexRepository $indexRepository
     * @param \Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Component\Elasticsearch\IndexDefinitionLoader $indexDefinitionLoader
     * @param \App\Model\Category\Elasticsearch\CategoryIndex $index
     * @param \Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Component\Domain\Domain $domain
     */
    public function __construct(
        CategoryExportScheduler $categoryExportScheduler,
        EntityManagerInterface $entityManager,
        IndexRepository $indexRepository,
        IndexDefinitionLoader $indexDefinitionLoader,
        CategoryIndex $index,
        Domain $domain
    ) {
        parent::__construct($categoryExportScheduler, $entityManager, $indexRepository, $indexDefinitionLoader, $index, $domain);
    }

    /**
     * @inheritDoc
     */
    public static function getSubscribedEvents(): array
    {
        return [
            KernelEvents::RESPONSE => [
                ['exportScheduledRows', 0],
            ],
        ];
    }
}
```

#### CategoryIndex::getExportDataForIds()

> To finish partial exports we need to implement the last unimplemented method in `CategoryIndex` to return all categories by their identifiers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To finish partial exports we need to implement the last unimplemented method in `CategoryIndex` – to return all categories by their identifiers.
```

We may also use already existing method from `CategoryRepository`.

```diff
    public function getExportDataForIds(int $domainId, array $restrictToIds): array
    {
-       // TODO: Implement getExportDataForIds() method.
+       $categories = $this->categoryRepository->getCategoriesByIds($restrictToIds);
+
+       $domainConfig = $this->domain->getDomainConfigById($domainId);
+       $locale = $domainConfig->getLocale();
+       foreach ($categories as $category) {
+           $result[$category->getId()] = $this->convertToElastic($category, $domainId, $locale);
+       }
+       return $result;
    }
```

## Conclusion

> We have created a new index category into elasticsearch. We are able to fill it with data (by a cron or immediately after row is changed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have created a new index category into elasticsearch. We were able to fill it with data (by a cron or immediately after a row is changed).
```

> From now you are able to use elasticsearch as a data source (data providing functionality is needed to be implemented) instead PostgreSQL which will save your performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From now you are able to use elasticsearch as a data source (data providing functionality is needed to be implemented) instead of PostgreSQL which will improve the performance of your application.
```
